Proton Synchrotron
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation Jump to search
   This article is about the particle accelerator at CERN. For the topic of proton synchrotrons, seeSynchrotron.
               CERN Complex




   Current particle and nuclear facilities
  LHC Accelerates protons and heavy ions
  LEIR Accelerates ions
  SPS Accelerates protons and ions
  PSB Accelerates protons
   PS Accelerates protons or ions
 Linac 3 Injects heavy ions into LEIR
 Linac4 Accelerates ions
   AD Decelerates antiprotons
 ELENA Decelerates antiprotons
ISOLDE Produces radioactive ion beams

The Proton Synchrotron (PS, sometimes also referred to as CPS[1]) is a particle accelerator at CERN. It is CERN's first synchrotron,
beginning its operation in 1959. For a brief period the PS was the world's highest energy particle accelerator. It has since served as a pre-
accelerator for the Intersecting Storage Rings (ISR) and the Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS), and is currently part of the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) accelerator complex. In addition to protons, PS has accelerated alpha particles, oxygen and sulfur nuclei, electrons,
positrons, and antiprotons.[2]

Today, the PS is part of CERN's accelerator complex. It accelerates protons for the LHC as well as a number of other experimental
facilities at CERN. Using a negative hydrogen ion source, the ions are first accelerated to the energy of 160 MeV in the linear accelerator
Linac 4. The hydrogen ion is then stripped of both electrons, leaving only the nucleus containing one proton, which is injected into the
Proton Synchrotron Booster (PSB), which accelerates the protons to 2 GeV, followed by the PS, which pushes the beam to 25 GeV.        [3]
The protons are then sent to the Super Proton Synchrotron, and accelerated to 450 GeV before they are injected into the LHC. The PS
also accelerate heavy ions from the Low Energy Ion Ring (LEIR) at an energy of 72 MeV, for collisions in the LHC.

Contents
     1 Background
     2 Operational history
           2.1 Preliminary studies
           2.2 1960–1976: Fixed-target and pre-accelerator to ISR
           2.3 1976–1991: Pre-accelerator to SPS/SppS and LEAR
           2.4 1991–2001: Pre-accelerator to LEP
           2.5 2001–today: Pre-accelerator to LHC
     3 Construction and operation
     4 Findings and discoveries
     5 References
     6 External links

Background[edit]
The synchrotron (as in Proton Synchrotron) is a type of cyclic particle accelerator, descended from the cyclotron, in which the accelerating
particle beam travels around a fixed path. The magnetic field which bends the particle beam into its fixed path increases with time, and is
synchronized to the increasing energy of the particles. As the particles travels around the fixed circular path they will oscillate around their
equilibrium orbit, a phenomenon called betatron oscillations.

In a conventional synchrotron the focusing of the circulating particles is achieved by weak focusing: the magnetic field that guides the
particles around the fixed radius decreases slightly with radius, causing the orbits of the particles with slightly different positions to
approximate each other. The amount of focusing in this way is not very great, and consequently the amplitudes of the betatron
oscillations are large. Weak focusing requires a large vacuum chamber, and consequently big magnets. Most of the cost of a conventional
synchrotron is the magnets. The PS was the first accelerator at CERN that made use of the alternating-gradient principle, also called
strong focusing: quadrupole magnets are used to alternately focus horizontally and vertically many times around the circumference of the
accelerator. The focusing of the particle can in theory become as strong as one wishes, and the amplitude of the betatron oscillations as
small as desired. The net result is that you can reduce the cost of the magnets.
Operational history[edit]
Preliminary studies[edit]

When early in the 1950s the plans for a European laboratory ofparticle physics began to take shape, two different accelerator projects
emerged. One machine was to be of standard type, easy and relatively fast and cheap to build: the synchrocyclotron, achieving collisions
at a center-of-mass energy of 600 MeV. The second device was a much more ambitious undertaking: an accelerator bigger than any
other then existing, a synchrotron that could accelerate protons up to an energy of 10 GeV – the PS.

By May 1952 a design group was set up withOdd Dahl in charge.[4] Other members of the group were among others Rolf Widerøe, Frank
Kenneth Goward, and John Adams. After a visit to the Cosmotron at Brookhaven National Laboratory in the US, the group learnt of a new
idea for making cheaper and higher energy machines: alternating-gradient focusing. The idea was so attractive that the study of a 10 GeV
synchrotron was dropped, and a study of a machine implementing the new idea initiated.[5] Using this principle a 30 GeV accelerator
could be built for the same cost as a 10 GeV accelerator using weak focusing.[5] However, the stronger focusing the higher a precision of
alignment of magnets required. This proved a serious problem in the construction of the accelerator.

A second problem in the construction period was the machines behavior at an energy called "transition energy". At this point the relative
increase in particle velocity changes from being greater to being smaller, causing the amplitude of the betatron oscillation to go to zero
and loss of stability in the beam. This was solved by a jump, or a sudden shift in the acceleration, in which pulsed quadruples made the
protons traverse the transition energy level much faster.

The PS was approved in October 1953, as a synchrotron of 25 GeV energy with a radius of 72 meter, and a budget of 120 millionSwiss
franc.[6] The focusing strength chosen required a vacuum chamber of 12 cm width and 8 cm height, with magnets of about 4000 tonnes
total mass. Dahl resigned as head of the project in October 1954 and was replaced by John Adams. By August 1959 the PS was ready for
its first beam, and on 24 of November the machine reached a beam energy of 24 GeV.[4]

1960–1976: Fixed-target and pre-accelerator to ISR[edit]




Aerial view of the 28 GeV Proton
Synchrotron. The underground ring of
the 28 GeV proton synchrotron in
1965. Left, the South and North
experimental halls. Top right, part of
the East hall. Bottom right, the main
generator room and the cooling
condensers.

By the end of 1965 the PS was the center of a spider's web of beam lines: It supplied protons to the South HallMeyrin
                                                                                                                (     site) where an
internal target produced five secondary beams, serving a neutrino experiment and a muon storage ring; the North Hall (Meyrin site) where
two bubble chambers (80 cm hydrogen Saclay, heavy liquid CERN) were fed by an internal target; when the East Hall (Meyrin site)
became available in 1963, protons from the PS hit an internal target producing a secondary beam filtered by electrostatic separators to
the CERN 2 m bubble chamber and additional experiments.[7]

Together with the construction of the Intersecting Storage Rings (ISR), an improvement program for the PS was decided in 1965, also
making space for the Gargamelle and the Big European Bubble Chamber experiments. The injection energy of the PS was raised by
constructing an 800 MeV four ring booster — the Proton Synchrotron Booster (PSB) — which became operational in 1972.[7]

1976–1991: Pre-accelerator to SPS/SppS and LEAR[edit]

In 1976 the Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS) became a new client of the PS. When SPS started to operate as aproton–antiproton collider
— the SppS — the PS had the double task of producing an intense 26 GeV/c proton beam for generatingantiprotons at 3.5 GeV/c to be
stored in the Antiproton Accumulator (AA), and then accelerating the antiprotons to 26 GeV/c for transfer to the SPS.

The linear accelerator, now serving the PSB, was replaced in 1978 byLinac 2, leading to an further increase in intensity.[7] During this
period acceleration of light ions entered the scene. Linac 1, which was replaced by Linac 2, was equipped to acceleratedeuterons that
were accelerated in the PS, and transferred to the ISR where they collided with protons or deuterons.
When the Low Energy Antiproton Ring (LEAR), for deceleration and storage of antiprotons, became operational in 1982, PS resumed the
new role of an antiproton decelerator. It decelerated antiprotons from the AA to 180 MeV, and injected them into LEAR. During this period
the PS complex truly earned its nickname of "versatile particle factory".[7] Up to 1996, PS would regularly accelerate ions for SPS fixed-
target experiments, protons for the East Hall or antiproton production at AA, decelerate protons for LEAR, and later accelerate electrons
and positrons for the Large Electron–Positron Collider (LEP).

1991–2001: Pre-accelerator to LEP[edit]




During its long operation the PS has increased its proton density many
times

To provide leptons to LEP, three more machines had to been added to the PS complex: LIL-V electron linear accelerator, the LIL-W
electron and positron linear accelerator, and the EPA (Electron-Positron Accumulator) storage ring. A modest amount of additional
hardware had to be added to modify PS from a 25 GeV proton synchrotron to a 3.5 GeV lepton synchrotron.

During this period the demand for heavier ions to be delivered as a primary beam to the SPS North experimental hallPrévessin
                                                                                                                   (         site) also
increased. Both sulfur and oxygen ions were accelerated with great success.

2001–today: Pre-accelerator to LHC[edit]

After the end of operation as a LEP injector, the PS started a new period of operation in preparation as LHC injector and for new fixed-
target experiments. New experiments started running in the East area, such as the CLOUD experiment. The PS complex was also
remodeled when the AA area was replaced by the Antiproton Decelerator and its experimental area.

By increasing the energy of the PSB and the Linac 2, the PS achieved record intensities in 2000 and 2001. During the whole of 2005 PS
was shut down: radiation damage had caused aging of the main magnets. The magnets, originally estimated to have a lifetime of less
than 10 years, had exceeded the estimate by more than a factor of four, and went through a refurbishment program. The tunnel was
emptied, magnets refurbished, and the machine realigned. In 2008 PS started operating as a pre-accelerator to the LHC. Simultaneously
the ion operation changed: LEAR was converted into a storage ring — the Low Energy Ion Ring (LEIR) — and the PSB stopped being an
ion injector.

Construction and operation[edit]
The PS is built in a tunnel, in which temperature is controlled to ± 1°. Around the circumference, 628 meters, there are 100 magnet units
of 4.4 m nominal length, 80 short straight sectors of 1.6 m, and 20 straight sectors of 3 m.[7] Sixteen long straight sections are equipped
with acceleration cavities, 20 short ones with quadruple correction lenses, and 20 short ones with sets of sextuple and octuplet lenses.
Other straight sections are reserved for beam observation stations and injection devices, targets, and ejection magnets.

As the alignment of the magnets is of paramount importance, the units are mounted on a free floating ring of concrete, 200 meters in
diameter.[5] As a further precaution, the concrete ring has steel pipes cast in it, where water passes through the ring to keep a constant
temperature in the magnets.

Findings and discoveries[edit]
Using a neutrino beam produced by a proton beam from PS, the Gargamelle experiment discoveredneutral currents in 1973.

References[edit]
   1. ^ Standley, P. H. (1966). The CPS improvement programme.
   2. ^ "The Proton Synchrotron". CERN. Retrieved 11 August 2017.
   3. ^ "Accelerators". CERN. Retrieved 11 August 2017.
   4. ^ a b Mersits, Ulrike (1990). "The Construction of the 28 GeV Proton Synchrotron and the first six years of its scientific exploration". In Hermann, A.;
      Krige, J.; Mersits, U.; Pestre, D. (eds.). History of CERN, Vol. II. Amsterdam: North-Holland. pp. 139–269.
   5. ^ a b c Bakker, C. J., ed. (1960). CERN's 25 GeV Proton Synchrotron. Geneva: CERN.
   6. ^ Minutes of the Session: Seventh Session, Geneva, 29-30 October 1953 (PDF). Rome: CERN. 1954. Retrieved 11 August 2017.
   7. ^ a b c d e Gilardoni, S.; Manglunki, D., eds. (2011). "The origins and the evolution of the CERN Proton Synchrotron". Fifty Years of the CERN Proton
      Synchrotron. Geneva: CERN. pp. 1–33 . Retrieved 16 August 2017.


External links[edit]
     Media related to Proton Synchrotron at Wikimedia Commons

                                         European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN)
     V

     T

     E




                                          List of LHC experiments
                                          ALICE
                                          ATLAS
                                          CMS
          Large Hadron Collider (LHC)     LHCb
                                          LHCf
                                          MoEDAL
                                          TOTEM
                                          FASER


                                          List of LEP experiments
                                          ALEPH
Large Electron–Positron Collider (LEP)    DELPHI
                                          OPAL
                                          L3


                                          List of SPS experiments
                                          AWAKE
                                          CNGS
                                          NA48
                                          NA49
                                          NA58/COMPASS
                                          NA60
      Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS)
                                          NA61/SHINE
                                          NA62
                                          UA1
                                          UA2
                                          BIBC
                                          LEBC
                                          HOLEBC


                                          PSB
                                          LEIR
                                          BEBC
                                          PS215/CLOUD
              Proton Synchrotron (PS)
                                          Gargamelle
                                          2 m Bubble Chamber
                                          30 cm Bubble Chamber
                                          81 cm Saclay Bubble Chamber


                                          AWAKE
                                          CTF3
                                          CLEAR
                   Linear accelerators    Linac
                                          Linac 2
                                          Linac 3
                                          Linac4
                                              AA (part of AAC)
                                              AC (part of AAC)
                                              AD
                                              ISOLDE
                                              ISOLTRAP
                                              WITCH
                                              ISR
                        Other accelerators    LEAR
                                              PS210
                                              LEIR
                                              LPI (LIL and EPA)
                                              n-TOF
                                              SC
                                              SppS



               Non-accelerator experiments    CAST


                                              High Luminosity Large Hadron Collider
                           Future projects    Compact Linear Collider
                                              Future Circular Collider


                                              LHC@home
                                              Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments
                                              CERN Courier
                                              CERN openlab
                           Related articles   Worldwide LHC Computing Grid
                                              Microcosm exhibition
                                              Streets in CERN
                                              The Globe of Science and Innovation
                                              Particle Fever (2013 documentary)



                                                                          Category


Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proton_Synchrotron&oldid=1044680447"
Categories:

     Accelerator physics
     Buildings and structures in the canton of Geneva
     CERN accelerators
     Particle accelerators
     Particle physics facilities
     CERN facilities

Hidden categories:

     Articles with short description
     Short description matches Wikidata
     Commons category link from Wikidata

Navigation menu
Personal tools

     Not logged in
     Talk
     Contributions
     Create account
     Log in

Namespaces

     Article
     Talk

   English
Views

      Read
      Edit
      View history

   More

Search Wikipedia            Search     Go

Navigation

      Main page
      Contents
      Current events
      Random article
      About Wikipedia
      Contact us
      Donate

Contribute

      Help
      Learn to edit
      Community portal
      Recent changes
      Upload file

Tools

      What links here
      Related changes
      Upload file
      Special pages
      Permanent link
      Page information
      Cite this page
      Wikidata item

Print/export

      Download as PDF
      Printable version

In other projects

      Wikimedia Commons

Languages

      ‫اﻟ ﻌ ﺮﺑﻴ ﺔ‬
      Čeština
      Deutsch
      Français
      Italiano
      ‫ע ב רי ת‬
      Lietuvių
      Magyar
      Polski
      Português
      Русский


Edit links

      This page was last edited on 16 September 2021, at 14:14 (UTC).
      Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site,
      you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-
      profit organization.

      Privacy policy
      About Wikipedia
      Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
